+++
title = "Boaty: Scaffolding a new React Native app"
date = 2018-10-14T16:43:44+01:00
categories = [
  "reactnative",
  "mobile"
]
description = "React Native is a framework for building native iOS and Android apps using JavaScript. This is the first in a series of posts aimed at building a React Native app from scratch."
+++

[React Native](https://facebook.github.io/react-native/) is a framework for building native iOS and Android apps using JavaScript. It builds upon the foundations laid by [React](https://reactjs.org), allowing you to build an app in a declarative way - using JSX, you inform React Native of your intentions (_I'd like a button here, please_) and the framework takes care of generating the (native) code to actually display a button to the screen.

I've been working happily with React Native for over a year now, and I am very happy with the results. There have been a lot of learnings along the way, which I'm going to attempt to distill into a few blog posts.

> Over this short mini-series, I'm going to build a simple app, _Boaty_. We'll be learning how to set up your environment before building and deploying the app for testing. You can follow along or [see the finished code here](https://github.com/studiozeffa/boaty-app).

Without further ado, let's dive in.

## Scaffolding

There are two options for scaffolding a React Native app:

1. Using Create React Native App
2. Using the React Native CLI

The differences between the two are discussed [in length here](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/45123576/react-native-vs-create-react-native-app). For the purposes of this app, I'm going to advocate the second method - using the React Native CLI. This has the downsides of needing to install Xcode and Android Studio, but (IMO) the flexibility that this approach provides outweighs the cost of setting up the tooling.

> Note: to build an iOS app you need Xcode, which is only available on a Mac. If you are a Windows user, you can still follow through with this guide, but will only be able to create an Android version of the app.

### Installing the tools

Follow the instructions on the [official setup guide](https://facebook.github.io/react-native/docs/getting-started.html) to install the necessary tools (make sure to click the _Building Projects with Native Code_ tab).

### Creating the app

Open up a terminal window and run the following command:

``` bash
react-native init Boaty
```

This will scaffold a new React Native app in a new folder `Boaty`.

### Running the app

In your terminal, change into the new `Boaty` folder.

``` bash
cd Boaty
```

You can now run the app in the iOS simulator:

``` bash
react-native run-ios
```

Alternatively, if you have an Android device, plug it in to your computer, and [enable USB Debugging](https://developer.android.com/studio/debug/dev-options). Then you can run the app on your Android device with:

``` bash
react-native run-android
```

> Tip: if you receive an error relating to 'device not found', check your USB cable. Some cables support charging only - you need a cable that allows data transfer as well as charging. If in doubt, use a different cable.

## Reference code

You can find the reference code for this post [in the part-01 tag of the GitHub repo](https://github.com/studiozeffa/boaty-app/tree/part-01).

## Next Steps

You should now have a working React Native app, running on the iOS simulator or Android device. In part 2, we'll learn how to set up your editing environment to improve the development experience.
